.TH JATAI 1 "2026-03-23" "0.7.3" "Jataí Manual"
.SH NAME
jatai \- local file-system message bus for scripts and agents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B jatai
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIARGS\fR]
.br
.B jatai
[\fIPATH\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Jataí
is a local micro-email and messaging bus that routes files between nodes on the
file system. Each node is a directory containing an INBOX and an OUTBOX. Files
dropped into an OUTBOX are delivered to the INBOXes of all registered nodes.
The background daemon watches for new files and handles delivery, retries, and
error reporting via filename prefix conventions.
.PP
Invoking
.B jatai
with no arguments opens the interactive TUI when running in an interactive
terminal. In non-interactive execution, it displays the CLI help summary.
.PP
Current TUI menu actions cover init, status, docs/log retrieval,
list/send/read/unread, config get/set, remove, clear, and daemon start/stop.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B jatai [\fIPATH\fR]
Shorthand for \fBjatai init\fR \fIPATH\fR. When \fIPATH\fR is provided and is
not a known sub-command, the directory at \fIPATH\fR is initialised as a new
Jataí node.
.TP
.B jatai init [\fIPATH\fR]
Initialise a Jataí node at \fIPATH\fR (defaults to the current working
directory). Creates the INBOX and OUTBOX directories, writes a local
\fI.jatai\fR configuration file, drops \fI!helloworld.md\fR into INBOX,
and registers the node in the global registry at \fI~/.jatai\fR.
.TP
.B jatai status
Show the status of the Jataí node in the current directory: node path,
local config path, and INBOX/OUTBOX file counts.
.TP
.B jatai start
Start the Jataí background daemon. The daemon watches all registered node
OUTBOXes and delivers files to their destination INBOXes. Auto-start is
registered for the current login session.
.RS
Short option: \fB-f\fR is available for foreground diagnostic mode (hidden/internal).
.RE
.TP
.B jatai stop
Stop the running Jataí daemon.
.TP
.B jatai docs [\fIQUERY\fR] [\fB-i\fR|\fB--inbox\fR]
Render docs in terminal by default. With \fB--inbox\fR, export docs content to
the current node INBOX.
.TP
.B jatai log [\fB-a\fR|\fB--all\fR] [\fB-i\fR|\fB--inbox\fR]
Show daemon logs in terminal. \fB--all\fR shows full output. \fB--inbox\fR exports
rendered output to current node INBOX.
.TP
.B jatai list [\fIaddrs|inbox|outbox\fR]
List known addresses or files from current node INBOX/OUTBOX. For
\fBaddrs\fR, output includes the registry source path (\fI~/.jatai\fR).
.TP
.B jatai send \fIFILE\fR [\fB-m\fR|\fB--move\fR]
Copy (or move) an external file into the current node OUTBOX.
.TP
.B jatai read \fIFILE\fR
Mark an INBOX file as read by adding the success prefix.
.TP
.B jatai unread \fIFILE\fR
Mark an INBOX file as unread by removing the success prefix.
.TP
.B jatai config [\fIKEY\fR] [\fIVALUE\fR] [\fB-G\fR|\fB--global\fR]
Write configuration values. \fB--global\fR targets global registry config.
Config keys are positional arguments. If \fIVALUE\fR is omitted, the command
fails and instructs the operator to use \fBjatai config get\fR.
.TP
.B jatai config get [\fIKEY\fR] [\fB-G\fR|\fB--global\fR] [\fB-i\fR|\fB--inbox\fR]
Read-only config retrieval. Defaults to local scope, switches to global with
\fB--global\fR, and can export output to current node INBOX with \fB--inbox\fR.
Terminal output includes a source config path header; INBOX export writes only
the rendered config payload.
.TP
.B jatai remove [\fIPATH\fR]
Soft-delete a node by renaming \fI.jatai\fR to \fI._jatai\fR.
.PP
If \fI.jatai\fR is manually deleted from an existing registered node directory,
daemon maintenance records the path in \fI/tmp/jatai/removed.yaml\fR with the
\fB--autoremoved\fR marker and does not recreate node files or directories.
.TP
.B jatai clear [\fB-r\fR|\fB--read\fR] [\fB-s\fR|\fB--sent\fR]
Clear processed history files from INBOX and/or OUTBOX.
.SH OPTIONS POLICY
Canonical short-option mappings:
.TP
.B -a
Equivalent to \fB--all\fR.
.TP
.B -i
Equivalent to \fB--inbox\fR.
.TP
.B -m
Equivalent to \fB--move\fR.
.TP
.B -r
Equivalent to \fB--read\fR.
.TP
.B -s
Equivalent to \fB--sent\fR.
.TP
.B -f
Equivalent to \fB--foreground\fR.
.TP
.B -G
Equivalent to \fB--global\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.jatai
Global registry and configuration file (YAML).
.TP
.I ~/.jatai.pid
PID file written by the daemon while it is running.
.TP
.I ~/.jatai_latest.log
Latest-log symlink/copy used by \fBjatai log\fR. The target location is configurable
via \fILATEST_LOG_PATH\fR in \fI~/.jatai\fR.
.TP
.I /tmp/jatai/logs/*.log
Rotated daemon log files.
.TP
.I /tmp/jatai/retry.yaml
Persistent retry-state file (JSON) tracking exponential back-off counters.
.TP
.I <NODE>/.jatai
Local node configuration file (YAML). Overrides global defaults for that node.
.TP
.I <NODE>/._jatai
Soft-delete marker. When present the node is considered disabled without
removing its configuration.
.TP
.I /tmp/jatai/bkp/<UUID>.yaml
System-level backup of the previous local configuration, used for rollback when
a configuration change causes a prefix collision.
.SH FILE PREFIX CONVENTIONS
Jataí uses filename prefixes to encode delivery state:
.TP
.B (no prefix)
File is pending delivery.
.TP
.B _
File was delivered successfully (processed).
.TP
.B !
Partial or total error \(em delivery failed after all retries.
.TP
.B !!
Fatal error \(em unrecoverable delivery failure.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B JATAI_REGISTRY
Override the default path to the global registry file (not yet implemented).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Operational error (node not found, daemon already running, etc.).
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at \fIhttps://github.com/zvorky/jatai/issues\fR
.SH AUTHOR
Enzo \(oqZvorky\(cq Zavorski Delevatti
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR watchdog (1),
.BR filelock (1)
